Getting Started with Nessus

Let's see how we can download and set up Nessus for its first use so that we can start learning its various features. Feel free to follow along and set up a Nessus instance on your own VM. For the interactive portions of this course, we provide a lab instance of Nessus and another with OpenVAS installed.

Downloading Nessus

To download Nessus, we can navigate to its Download Page to download the correct Nessus binary for our system. We will be downloading the Debian package for Ubuntu for this walkthrough.



Requesting Free License

Next, we can visit the Activation Code Page to request a Nessus Activation Code, which is necessary to get the free version of Nessus:


Installing Package

With both the binary and activation code in hand, we can now install the Nessus package:

$ dpkg -i Nessus-8.15.1-ubuntu910_amd64.deb

Selecting previously unselected package nessus.
(Reading database ... 132030 files and directories currently installed.)
Preparing to unpack Nessus-8.15.1-ubuntu910_amd64.deb ...
Unpacking nessus (8.15.1) ...
Setting up nessus (8.15.1) ...
Unpacking Nessus Scanner Core Components...
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/nessusd.service → /lib/systemd/system/nessusd.service.
Created symlink /etc/systemd/system/multi-user.target.wants/nessusd.service → /lib/systemd/system/nessusd.service.
Starting Nessus

Once we have Nessus installed, we can start the Nessus Service:

$ sudo systemctl start nessusd.service

Accessing Nessus

To access Nessus, we can navigate to https://localhost:8834. Once we arrive at the setup page, we should select Nessus Essentials for the free version, and then we can enter our activation code:



Once we enter our activation code, we can set up a user with a secure password for our Nessus account. Then, the plugins will begin to compile once this step is completed:

Note: The VM provided at the Nessus Skills Assessment chapter has Nessus pre-installed and the targets running. You can go to that chapter and start the VM (click "Spawn target") and use Nessus throughout the course, which can be accessed at https:// < IP >:8834. The Nessus credentials are: htb-student:HTB_@cademy_student!. You may also use these credentials to SSH into the target VM to configure Nessus.
Finally, once the setup is complete, we can start creating scans, scan policies, plugin rules, and customizing settings. The Settings page has a wealth of options such as setting up a Proxy Server or SMTP server, standard account management options, and advanced settings to customize the user interface, scanning, logging, performance, and security options.

Nessus Scan

A new Nessus scan can be configured by clicking New Scan, and selecting a scan type. Scan templates fall into three categories: Discovery, Vulnerabilities, and Compliance.

Note: The scans shown in this chapter have already been pre-run to save you the time of waiting for them to finish. If you re-run the scan, it's best to go through vulnerabilities as they come, instead of waiting for the scan to finish, as they can take 1-2 hours to finish.
New Scan

Here we have options for a basic Host Discovery scan to identify live hosts/open ports or a variety of scan types such as the Basic Network Scan, Advanced Scan, Malware Scan, Web Application Tests,


https://docs.tenable.com/nessus/Content/ScanAndPolicyTemplates.htm


Note: For this course, the Windows target will be 172.16.16.100 and the Linux target will be 172.16.16.160.

Discovery

In the Discovery section, under Host Discovery, we're presented with the option to enable scanning for fragile devices. Scanning devices such as network printers often result in them printing out reams of paper with garbage text, leaving the devices unusable


In Port Scanning, we can choose whether to scan common ports, all ports, or a self-defined range, depending on our requirements:

Within the Service Discovery subsection, the Probe all ports to find services option is selected by default. It's possible that a poorly designed application or service could crash as a result of this probing, but most applications should be robust enough to handle this. Searching for SSL/TLS services is also enabled by default on a custom scan, and Nessus can additionally be instructed to identify expiring and revoked certificates.

Assessment

Under the Assessment category, web application scanning can also be enabled if required, and a custom user agent and various other web application scanning options can be specified (e.g., a URL for Remote File Inclusion (RFI) testing):


If desired, Nessus can attempt to authenticate against discovered applications and services using provided credentials (if running a credentialed scan), or else can perform a brute-force attack with the provided username and password lists:

User enumeration can also be performed using various techniques, such as RID Brute Forcing:

If we opt to perform RID Brute Forcing, we can set the starting and ending UIDs for both domain and local user accounts:

Advanced

On the Advanced tab, safe checks are enabled by default. This prevents Nessus from running checks that may negatively impact the target device or network. We can also choose to slow or throttle the scan if Nessus detects any network congestion, stop attempting to scan any hosts that become unresponsive, and even choose to have Nessus scan our target IP list in random order:


Advanced Settings

We can configure a number of advanced settings for Nessus and its scans, like scan policies, plugins, and credentials, all of which we will cover in this chapter.

Scan Policies

Nessus gives us the option to create scan policies. Essentially these are customized scans that allow us to define specific scan options, save the policy configuration, and have them available to us under Scan Templates when creating a new scan. This gives us the ability to create targeted scans for any number of scenarios, such as a slower, more evasive scan, a web-focused scan, or a scan for a particular client using one or several sets of credentials. Scan policies can be imported from other Nessus scanners or exported to be later imported into another Nessus scanner.


Creating a Scan Policy

To create a scan policy, we can click on the New Policy button in the top right, and we will be presented with the list of pre-configured scans. We can choose a scan, such as the Basic Network Scan, then customize it, or we can create our own. We will choose Advanced Scan to create a fully customized scan with no pre-configured recommendations built-in.

After choosing the scan type as our base, we can give the scan policy a name and a description if needed:


From here, we can configure settings, add in any necessary credentials, and specify any compliance standards to run the scan against. We can also choose to enable or disable entire plugin families or individual plugins.

Once we have finished customizing the scan, we can click on Save, and the newly created policy will appear in the polices list. From here on, when we go to create a new scan, there will be a new tab named User Defined under Scan Templates that will show all of our custom scan policies:

Nessus Plugins

Nessus works with plugins written in the Nessus Attack Scripting Language (NASL) and can target new vulnerabilities and CVEs. These plugins contain information such as the vulnerability name, impact, remediation, and a way to test for the presence of a particular issue.

Plugins are rated by severity level: Critical, High, Medium, Low, Info. At the time of this writing Tenable has published 145,973 plugins that cover 58,391 CVE IDs and 30,696 Bugtraq IDs. A searchable database of all published plugins is on the Tenable website.

The Plugins tab provides more information on a particular detection, including mitigation. When conducting recurring scans, there may be a vulnerability/detection that, upon further examination, is not considered to be an issue. For example, Microsoft DirectAccess (a technology that provides internal network connectivity to clients over the Internet) allows insecure and null cipher suites. The below scan performed with sslscan shows an example of insecure and null cipher suites:

$ sslscan example.com

<SNIP>

Preferred TLSv1.0  128 bits  ECDHE-RSA-AES128-SHA          Curve 25519 DHE 253
Accepted  TLSv1.0  256 bits  ECDHE-RSA-AES256-SHA          Curve 25519 DHE 253
Accepted  TLSv1.0  128 bits  DHE-RSA-AES128-SHA            DHE 2048 bits
Accepted  TLSv1.0  256 bits  DHE-RSA-AES256-SHA            DHE 2048 bits
Accepted  TLSv1.0  128 bits  AES128-SHA                   
Accepted  TLSv1.0  256 bits  AES256-SHA                   

<SNIP>
However, this is by design. SSL/TLS is not required in this case, and implementing it would result in a negative performance impact. To exclude this false positive from the scan results while keeping the detection active for other hosts, we can create a plugin rule:


Under the Resources section, we can select Plugin Rules. In the new plugin rule, we input the host to be excluded, along with the Plugin ID for Microsoft DirectAccess, and specify the action to be performed as Hide this result:

We may also want to exclude certain issues from our scan results, such as plugins for issues that are not directly exploitable (e.g., SSL Self-Signed Certificate). We can do this by specifying the plugin ID and host(s) to be excluded:

Scanning with Credentials

Nessus also supports credentialed scanning and provides a lot of flexibility by supporting LM/NTLM hashes, Kerberos authentication, and password authentication.

Credentials can be configured for host-based authentication via SSH with a password, public key, certificate, or Kerberos-based authentication. It can also be configured for Windows host-based authentication with a password, Kerberos, LM hash, or NTLM hash:

Nessus also supports authentication for a variety of databases types including Oracle, PostgreSQL, DB2, MySQL, SQL Server, MongoDB, and Sybase:

Note: To run a credentialed scan on the target, use the following credentials: htb-student_adm:HTB_@cademy_student! for Linux, and administrator:Academy_VA_adm1! for Windows. These scans have already been set up in the Nessus target to save you time.
In addition to that, Nessus can perform plaintext authentication to services such as FTP, HTTP, IMAP, IPMI, Telnet, and more:

Finally, we can check the Nessus output to confirm whether the authentication to the target application or service with the supplied credentials was successful:

Working with Nessus Scan Output

Nessus gives us the option to export scan results in a variety of report formats as well as the option to export raw Nessus scan results to be imported into other tools, archived, or passed to tools, such as EyeWitness, which can be used to take screenshots of all web applications identified by Nessus and greatly assist us with working through the results and finding more value in them.

Nessus Reports

Once a scan is completed we can choose to export a report in .pdf, .html, or .csv formats. The .pdf and .html reports give the option for either an Executive Summary or a custom report. The Executive Summary report provides a listing of hosts, a total number of vulnerabilities discovered per host, and a Show Details option to see the severity, CVSS score, plugin number, and name of each discovered issue. The plugin number contains a link to the full plugin writeup from the Tenable plugin database. The PDF option provides the scan results in a format that is easier to share. The CSV report option allows us to select which columns we would like to export. This is particularly useful if importing the scan results into another tool such as Splunk if a document needs to be shared with many internal stakeholders responsible for remediation of the various assets scanned or to perform analytics on the scan data.


Note: These scan reports should only be shared as either an appendix or supplementary data to a custom penetration test/vulnerability assessment report. They should not be given to a client as the final deliverable for any assessment type.
An example of the HTML report is shown below:


It is best to always make sure the vulnerabilities are grouped together for a clear understanding of each issue and the assets affected.

Exporting Nessus Scans

Nessus also gives the option to export scans into two formats Nessus (scan.nessus) or Nessus DB (scan.db). The .nessus file is an .xml file and includes a copy of the scan settings and plugin outputs. The .db file contains the .nessus file and the scan's KB, plugin Audit Trail, and any scan attachments. More information about the KB and Audit Trail can be found here.

Scripts such as the nessus-report-downloader can be used to quickly download scan results in all available formats from the CLI using the Nessus REST API:

$ ./nessus_downloader.rb 

Nessus 6 Report Downloader 1.0

Enter the Nessus Server IP: 127.0.0.1
Enter the Nessus Server Port [8834]: 8834
Enter your Nessus Username: admin
Enter your Nessus Password (will not echo): 

Getting report list...
Scan ID Name                                               Last Modified                  Status         
------- ----                                               -------------                  ------         
1     Windows_basic                                Aug 22, 2020 22:07 +00:00      completed      
         
Enter the report(s) your want to download (comma separate list) or 'all': 1

Choose File Type(s) to Download: 
[0] Nessus (No chapter selection)
[1] HTML
[2] PDF
[3] CSV (No chapter selection)
[4] DB (No chapter selection)
Enter the file type(s) you want to download (comma separate list) or 'all': 3

Path to save reports to (without trailing slash): /assessment_data/inlanefreight/scans/nessus

Downloading report(s). Please wait...

[+] Exporting scan report, scan id: 1, type: csv
[+] Checking export status...
[+] Report ready for download...
[+] Downloading report to: /assessment_data/inlanefreight/scans/nessus/inlanefreight_basic_5y3hxp.csv

Report Download Completed!
We can also write our own scripts to automate many Nessus features.


Scanning Issues

Nessus is a well-known and widely used vulnerability scanning platform. However, a few best practices should be taken into consideration before starting a scan. Scans can cause issues on sensitive networks and provide false positives, no results, or have an unfavorable impact on the network. It is always best to communicate with your client (or internal stakeholders if running a scan against your own network) on whether any sensitive/legacy hosts should be excluded from the scan or if any high priority/high availability hosts should be scanned separately, outside of regular business hours, or with different scan configurations to avoid potential issues.

There are also times when a scan may return unexpected results and need to be fine-tuned.

Mitigating Issues

Some firewalls will cause us to receive scan results showing either all ports open or no ports open. If this happens, a quick fix is often to configure an Advanced Scan and disable the Ping the remote host option. This will stop the scan from using ICMP to verify that the host is "live" and instead proceed with the scan. Some firewalls may return an "ICMP Unreachable" message that Nessus will interpret as a live host and provide many false-positive informational findings.

In sensitive networks, we can use rate-limiting to minimize impact. For example, we can adjust Performance Options and modify Max Concurrent Checks Per Host if the target host is often under heavy load, such as a widely used web application. This will limit the number of plugins used concurrently against the host.

We can avoid scanning legacy systems and choose the option not to scan printers, as we showed in an earlier chapter. If a host is of particular concern, it should be left out of the target scope or we can use the nessusd.rules file to configure Nessus scans. More information about it you can find here.

Finally, unless specifically requested, we should never perform Denial of Service checks. We can ensure that these types of plugins are not used by always enabling the "safe checks" option when performing scans to avoid any network plugins that can have a negative impact on a target, such as crashing a network daemon. Enabling the "safe checks" option does not guarantee that a Nessus vulnerability scan will have zero adverse impact but will significantly minimize potential impact and decrease scanning time.

It is always best to communicate with our clients or internal stakeholders and alert necessary personnel before starting a scan. When the scan is completed, we should keep detailed logs of the scanning activity in case an incident occurs that must be investigated.

Network Impact

It is also essential to keep in mind the potential impact of vulnerability scanning on a network, especially on low bandwidth or congested links. This can be measured using vnstat:

$ sudo apt install vnstat

Let's monitor the eth0 network adapter before running a Nessus scan:

$ sudo vnstat -l -i eth0

Monitoring eth0...    (press CTRL-C to stop)

   rx:       332 bit/s     0 p/s          tx:       332 bit/s     0 p/s

   rx:         0 bit/s     0 p/s          tx:         0 bit/s     0 p/s
   rx:         0 bit/s     0 p/s          tx:         0 bit/s     0 p/s^C

 eth0  /  traffic statistics

                           rx         |       tx
--------------------------------------+------------------
  bytes                        572 B  |           392 B
--------------------------------------+------------------
          max              480 bit/s  |       332 bit/s
      average              114 bit/s  |        78 bit/s
          min                0 bit/s  |         0 bit/s
--------------------------------------+------------------
  packets                          8  |               5
--------------------------------------+------------------
          max                  1 p/s  |           0 p/s
      average                  0 p/s  |           0 p/s
          min                  0 p/s  |           0 p/s
--------------------------------------+------------------
  time                    40 seconds
We can compare this result with the result we get when monitoring the same interface during a Nessus scan against just one host:

$ sudo vnstat -l -i eth0

Monitoring eth0...    (press CTRL-C to stop)

   rx:   307.92 kbit/s   641 p/s          tx:   380.41 kbit/s   767 p/s^C

 eth0  /  traffic statistics

                           rx         |       tx
--------------------------------------+------------------
  bytes                     1.04 MiB  |        1.34 MiB
--------------------------------------+------------------
          max          414.81 kbit/s  |   480.59 kbit/s
      average          230.57 kbit/s  |   296.72 kbit/s
          min                0 bit/s  |         0 bit/s
--------------------------------------+------------------
  packets                      18252  |           22733
--------------------------------------+------------------
          max                864 p/s  |         969 p/s
      average                480 p/s  |         598 p/s
          min                  0 p/s  |           0 p/s
--------------------------------------+------------------
  time                    38 seconds


real  0m38.588s
user  0m0.002s
sys 0m0.016s
When comparing the results, we can see that the number of bytes and packets transferred during a vulnerability scan is quite significant and can severely impact a network if not tuned properly or performed against fragile/sensitive devices.



